[Music]
well hi unless you're an astronomer you
probably don't think of stars as moving
all that quickly you might not even know
that they move at all if that's the case
you'd be surprised to learn that a star
called
s5 hbs1 is zipping through our galaxy at
over 10,000 miles per hour all right
buddy what's your hurry license and
registration
ow you're awfully bright as with many of
the best discoveries astronomers found
this rogue star entirely by accident
researchers were conducting a survey of
what they called stellar streams
remnants of smaller galaxies torn apart
and absorbed into the much larger Milky
Way an astronomer by the name of Sarah
Gaeko passov was going through some of
the survey data when he came across some
unusual readings he was looking for
stars with unusually rapid orbits but
was surprised to find one fleeing the
galaxies at record speeds now it's hard
to tell by looking at them but stars are
in constant motion orbiting the center
of the galaxy just like the Earth orbits
the Sun astronomers call this normal
movement proper motion stars move at
varying rates but due to the distances
involved it can take centuries for these
changes in position to become apparent
however s5 hbs1 you know let's just call
him speedy while speedy is no ordinary
star and its movement isn't at all
normal this recently discovered star is
racing toward the outer edge of our
galaxy having been ejected from its
orbit at a velocity never before seen in
recorded history astronomers classify
this white-hot ball of plasma as an
a-type main sequence star and have
estimated it to be more than two times
the size of the Sun that alone wouldn't
make it unusual but it's very odd to
find a star of that size moving at such
high speeds scientists call these astral
speedsters hypervelocity stars and they
tend to be either much larger or
substantially smaller than speedy
the latter aren't technically true stars
at all known as neutron stars these
extremely dense but comparatively tiny
balls of slowly cooling plasma are
what's left over after a star completes
its lifecycle and goes supernova and
when I say small but dense I mean it
these former stars are usually only
about twelve or so miles in diameter
but contain more matter than the Sun in
those cases you can probably guess how
these cosmic leftovers find themselves
curled through space at breakneck speeds
when a star goes supernova
it doesn't always explode even layer
these lopsided detonations not only
expel a few dozen Suns worth of gas and
plasma but also hurl what remains of the
star through the cosmos at almost half
the speed of light considering humans
have only been able to propel an object
at a fraction of that it looks like
Mother Nature has us beat but speedy
isn't a neutron star so why is it
getting expelled from the galaxy like a
spare tire improperly secured to the
back of a truck
the answer is gravity the slightly less
simple answer is gravity from black
holes and the vastly more complicated
answer is what scientists call a three
body exchange they work a bit like this
you start with two stars orbiting each
other in what's known as a binary star
system although the immense distance
between star systems makes it impossible
to tell with the naked eye multi star
Arrangements like this aren't that
uncommon Alpha Centauri the closest star
system to the Sun is actually made up of
three stars of varying sizes while these
systems might seem chaotic and unstable
as with any set of roommate's
order can be maintained as long as
everyone agrees to follow clear
boundaries oh and if anyone was
wondering the gravity of these two stars
does some weird things to the planets
orbiting them while some scientists
believe life could still develop on
these hostile worlds I wouldn't hold my
breath
yeah I can't do it as I was saying
things can get pretty wild when black
holes are added to the mix when these
binary systems drift too close to a
black hole its mass disrupts the
delicate balance of gravity and momentum
that keeps the system stable what
follows is a chaotic dance as the Stars
loop wildly around their new anchor the
lighter objects building speed as they
slingshot around it each stars gravity
influences the other's movement sending
them careening through space on crazy
trajectories eventually one of the stars
gains enough velocity to break away from
the system flying off in a random
direction at a high rate of speed
if you ever swung your key chain around
your finger only to have it soar out of
reach you've seen a version of this in
action what differentiates speeding from
the other black hole ejections is the
Stars comparatively low mass despite
being more massive than our own Sun it's
a shrimp compared to the much larger
blue and ultraviolet stars more commonly
seen in such events less mass means less
gravity which in turn means less energy
propelling the star and it took a lot of
energy to expel speedy at its current
speed enough force in fact that if the
earth were to be somehow subject to it
our planet would accelerate to
ninety-nine point seven percent of the
speed of light now well that almost
definitely won't happen feel free to
hold on to something solid just in case
to generate that much energy with a star
that small the black hole that disrupted
Speedy's orbit would need to be
extremely massive supermassive might be
the more accurate term since astronomers
have determined that based on the Stars
trajectory it was sent flying by none
other than the supermassive black hole
at the center of our galaxy known to
astronomers as Sagittarius a this
enormous collapsed R is what gives the
milky way its shape it's also the only
object with a strong enough
gravitational field to play driver
to our favourite cosmic golf ball they
make speedy the first confirmed object
to be ejected from our galaxy's core
this is an important discovery as it
fills in a crucial missing piece toward
understanding how our galaxy works
before being bedded across the universe
speedy would have been paired with a
second much smaller star this star would
have been significantly less massive
than the Sun and was most likely
absorbed into the black hole
during the catastrophic disruption of
its orbit as for how exactly speedy
found itself swatted across the galaxy
by the universe is the largest bat
astronomers have two competing theories
the first one is that both stars
originated in the supermassive black
holes accretion disk
this is the astronomical term for the
broad ring of gases and dust that orbits
just beyond the event horizon the point
of no return from which nothing not even
light can escape the black hole's
intense gravitational pull conditions
inside the disk would be perfect for the
formation of stars and the black hole's
enormous size guarantees there would be
enough matter for that to happen this
unusual method of creation would explain
how two stars of such radically
different mass could form a stable
binary system given their proximity to
the black hole the stars wouldn't have
far to drift to find themselves close
enough for their orbits to be disrupted
the other possibility is that a smaller
black hole could have been pulled into
it's more massive cousin if this
happened their combined gravity could
have been enough to wrench nearby stars
out of orbit well astronomers consider
this the less likely of the two
possibilities a definitive answer either
way we'll give researchers a lot to work
with astronomers may not have a perfect
answer yet
what speedy is still under observation
and there's no doubt more to uncover
researchers hope that information gained
from the gayest star mapping project
which is set to complete in 2021 will
shed new light on this cosmic mystery
for now
astronomers are eager to find more
hypervelocity stars in hopes of gaining
a better understanding of what's going
on in the galactic center and how mass
is distributed across the vast
collection of stars we call the Milky
Way these discoveries would radically
change our understanding of the cosmos
so it's no surprise that astronomers are
chomping at the bit for more information
hmm astronomers chomping at the bit hey
I'd watch that how about you are there
any other scientific mysteries you're
eager to see uncovered let me know down
below hey if you learn something new
today then give this video a like and
share it with a friend but don't go off
into outer space just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out right here just click on
this left or right video and enjoy stay
on the bright side of life